Standard definition for the Validators (linters) (#105)
operator-framework/enhancements: enhancements/validators.md

---
title: Standard definition for the Validators (linters)
authors:
- "@camilamacedo86"
  reviewers:
- TBD
  approvers:
- TBD
  creation-date: 2021-12-02
  last-updated: 2021-12-02
  status:implemented
  see-also:
- https://github.com/operator-framework/enhancements/pull/98
---

# Standard definition for external validators

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [x] Enhancement is `implemented`
- [x] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [x] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA

## Summary

The Validators are static checks (linters) that can scan the manifests and provide
with low-cost valuable results to ensure the quality of the package of distributions(bundle or package formats) which will be distributed via OLM,
to ensure that they respect some specific criteria for vendors and/or catalogs.

> For example, [Openshift](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.6/operators/admin/olm-managing-custom-catalogs.html)

Author: ```suggestion
For example, Openshift
```

> catalog is composed of more than one image (see [here](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.6/operators/admin/olm-managing-custom-catalogs.html)). To publish via each image is required to respect some specific criteria

Author: ```suggestion
its catalog is composed of more than one image (see [here](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.6/operators/admin/olm-managing-custom-catalogs.html)). To publish via each image is required to respect some specific criteria
```

such as to be part of the vendor catalog.

This proposal aims to provide a standard definition to reduce the complexity of keeping these rules
maintained and consumed.

## Motivation

- Reduces the effort and complexity to keep the validations and rules maintained
- Bring visibility and clarity over what common criteria are for distributing via OLM, for publishing to OpenShift or for publishing via certain Index catalogs.
- Defining a standard definition leveraging the [operator-framework/API][of-api] without the need to re-implement and to keep maintaining what is in common.
- A clear strategy definition about what can be introduced and supported in [operator-framework/API][of-api]
- A standard definition that brings flexibility and allows leveraging what exists and is already in use.
### Goals

> - [operator-framework/API][of-api] providing and defining what is a common use for any validator such as:

Author: ```suggestion
- [operator-framework/API][of-api] providing and defining what is in common use for any validator such as:
```

  - possible output formats

>   - common criteria, rules and suggestions to distribute solutions via OLM under Operator Framework, which are not a vendor and/or catalog specific

Author: ```suggestion
  - common criteria, rules and suggestions to distribute Operators via OLM under Operator Framework, which are not a vendor and/or catalog specific
```

 leveraging what we have already implemented.

**Domain of Responsibilities**

[operator-framework/API][of-api]:
- providing a common framework for internal and external validators
- providing common validators (which are useful and required for any solution which will be distributed via OLM)

External Validators:
- location for Index Catalog or vendor-specific validators
- implementation of catalog or vendor-specific validation logic
- Extending [operator-framework/API][of-api] and using it as a lib to ensure a standard for its consumers

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

[operator-framework/API][of-api]:
- Interfaces: https://github.com/operator-framework/api/blob/v0.10.7/pkg/validation/interfaces/validator.go
- Implementation of the interfaces for the validations: https://github.com/operator-framework/api/blob/v0.10.7/pkg/validation/validation.go
- Structure for results (`ManifestResults`): https://github.com/operator-framework/api/blob/v0.10.7/pkg/validation/errors/error.go

**External validators:**
- To ensure the standard criteria to publish in Openshift catalog: https://github.com/redhat-openshift-ecosystem/ocp-olm-catalog-validator

> - To ensure specific criteria to publish in the OperatorHub image/catalog: https://github.com/camilamacedo86/k8s-community-validator

Author: ```suggestion
- To ensure specific criteria to publish in the OperatorHub image/catalog: https://github.com/k8s-operatorhub/bundle-validator
```

1) Ensure the common criteria:

```
$ operator-sdk bundle validate ./bundle --select-optional suite=operatorframework --optional-values=k8s-version=<k8s-version>
```

2) Ensure the OCP specific criteria:

```
$ ocp-olm-catalog-validator <bundle-path> --optional-values="range==<OCP labels>" --output=json-alpha1
```

##### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

N/A

##### Tech Preview -> GA

N/A

##### Removing a deprecated feature

Following the details over move from operator-framework/api and SDK specific vendor/catalog checks
to the external validator.

**Announce deprecation to move the specific checks for the external validator:**
- SDK: PR: https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-sdk/pull/5414
- Operator-Framework/api: PR: https://github.com/operator-framework/api/pull/199

**Plan for removal**
- Issue: https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-sdk/issues/5422

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

Validators consumers must only bump the dependency tags versions or define what binary version
ought to use to upgrade or downgrade.

### Version Skew Strategy

External validators ought to have implemented a GitHub Action to perform releases automatically and with low effort

> such as it was implemented for [ocp olm catalog validator][ocp-validator], see: .

Author: ```suggestion
such as it was implemented for [ocp olm catalog validator][ocp-validator], see: [here](https://github.com/redhat-openshift-ecosystem/ocp-olm-catalog-validator/blob/main/.github/workflows/release.yaml).
```

---
title: Standard definition for the Validators (linters)
authors:
- "@camilamacedo86"
  reviewers:
- TBD
  approvers:
- TBD
  creation-date: 2021-12-02
  last-updated: 2021-12-02
  status:implemented
  see-also:
- https://github.com/operator-framework/enhancements/pull/98
---

# Standard definition for external validators

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [x] Enhancement is `implemented`
- [x] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [x] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA

## Summary

The Validators are static checks (linters) that can scan the manifests and provide

> with low-cost valuable results to ensure the quality of the distributions which will be distributed via OLM,

Author: The Validators checks the bundle/package and not actually the Operator.

> with low-cost valuable results to ensure the quality of the distributions which will be distributed via OLM,

Author: ```suggestion
with low-cost valuable results to ensure the quality of the package of distributions(bundle or package formats) which will be distributed via OLM,
```

to ensure that they respect some specific criteria for vendors and/or catalogs.

> For example, [Openshit](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.6/operators/admin/olm-managing-custom-catalogs.html)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, [Openshift](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.6/operators/admin/olm-managing-custom-catalogs.html)
```

> catalog is composed for more than one image. To publish via each image is required to respect some specific criteria

Author: ```suggestion
catalog is composed of more than one image (see [here](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.6/operators/admin/olm-managing-custom-catalogs.html)). To publish via each image is required to respect some specific criteria
```

such as to be part of the vendor catalog.

> 

Reviewer 2: I am not sure to follow. If I understand correctly I would rewrite and say something like:
Catalogs are often composed or more than one operator. Some criteria need to be met for publishing new or additional operators that may be specific to the vendor catalog.

Author: The OCP catalog is really composed of more than one image. We have the redhat/certified/community/marketplace index catalog to create the OCP catalog.

Reviewer 2: I see but I would not call that "OCP catalog", possibly OpenShift catalogs but rather as [here](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.9/operators/understanding/olm-rh-catalogs.html) Red Hat-provided Operator catalogs

Reviewer 3: I would avoid using the word `Catalog` here to mean a set of catalogs. In OLM nomenclature, `Catalog` is synonymous with a single source of content. The metaphor we generally try to follow is that a `Catalog` is equivalent to a package manager's `repository`. Similar to `dnf` or `yum` repositories of rpms.

So, in that context, I would rephrase this to say something like `Openshift's set of OLM content is composed of multiple Catalog Sources`

> This proposal aims to provide a standard definition to reduce the complexities of keeping these rules

Author: ```suggestion
This proposal aims to provide a standard definition to reduce the complexity of keeping these rules
```

maintained and consumed.

## Motivation

> - Reduces the effort and complexities to keep the validations and rules maintained

Author: ```suggestion
- Reduces the effort and complexity to keep the validations and rules maintained
```

> - Bring visibility and clarity over what are common criteria to distributed via OLM, to publish on Openshift or to distributed via certain image catalogs

Author: ```suggestion
- Bring visibility and clarity over what common criteria are for distributing via OLM, for publishing to OpenShift or for publishing via certain Index catalogs.
```

> - Defining a standard definition that brings flexibility to introduce specific rules levering in the [operator-framework/API][of-api] without the need to re-implement and keep maintained what is the common use

Author: ```suggestion
- Defining a standard definition leveraging the [operator-framework/API][of-api] without the need to re-implement and to keep maintaining what is in common.
```

- A clear strategy definition about what can be introduced and supported in [operator-framework/API][of-api]

> 

Author: ```suggestion
- A standard definition that brings flexibility and allows leveraging what exists and is already in use.
```

### Goals

- [operator-framework/API][of-api] providing and defining what is a common use for any validator such as:
  - possible output formats

>   - common criteria, rules and suggestions to distribute solutions via OLM under Operator Framework, which are not a vendor and/or catalog specific

Author: The solutions could be replaced by Operators but the text shows began tiring to read when we repeat too much the same word

>   - common criteria, rules and suggestions to distribute solutions via OLM under Operator Framework, which are not a vendor and/or catalog specific

Author: But I think that we did not use too many Operators so that is fine. :-)

  - validators interface

>   - the struct to ensure a standard for the results of the test

Author: ```suggestion
  -  a standard format for the results of the tests
```

> - Ability to use [operator-framework/API][of-api] to build external validators with specific criteria, which are vendor or index catalog specific

Author: ```suggestion
-  Ability to use the [operator-framework/API][of-api] to build external validators, which are vendor or Operator catalog specific
```

> - Ability to consume many and different validators from different maintainers and sources without the need to deal with complexities related to different result structures

Author: ```suggestion
- Ability to consume various validators from different maintainers and sources by working with a single common result format
```

> - Have a standard definition that brings flexibility, allows leverage in what exists and in use without bringing extra high cost but allows us to add value with lower effort and with higher sustainability

Author: ```suggestion
```

> - Ability to use the Validators via tools, code source, ci and jobs

Author: ```suggestion
- Ability to use the Validators via CLI tools (such as SDK and OPM) or any project by importing as a dependency or indeed address the common need to call them in Continuous Integration (CI) process
```

> - Ensure that upstream projects do not need to support and maintain specific criteria for vendors and catalogs

Author: ```suggestion
- Remove the need to have vendor or catalog specific validators in-tree
```

### Non-Goals

> - SDK working with external validators. (_It is the scope of another PE, see [here](https://github.com/operator-framework/enhancements/pull/98)_)

Author: ```suggestion
- Amending the Operator SDK so that it works with external validators. (_It is the scope of another PE, see [here](https://github.com/operator-framework/enhancements/pull/98)_)
```

> - New output or interface definitions that might be beneficial

Author: ```suggestion
- New options to output the results such as JUnit or changes in the interface definitions that might be beneficial in long term
```

> - Changes or improvements in the current interfaces, functionalities or validators

Author: ```suggestion
- Changes or improvements to the current interfaces, functionalities or validators
```

## Proposal

> The goal of this proposal is to ensure that we can along with a defined standard concept and vision

Author: ```suggestion
The goal of this proposal is to ensure that we agree on a defined standard concept and vision
```

> which can help us in the medium/long term have solutions with better maintainability, usability and understandability

Author: ```suggestion
which can help us in the medium/long term with improving maintainability, usability and readability.
```

> which can help us in the medium/long term have solutions with better maintainability, usability and understandability

Author: Accepted. I think that is clear in the details right? I will make that is done but please feel free to let me know if the doc is missing some required detail.

> levering in what we have implemented currently.

Author: ```suggestion
 leveraging what we have already implemented.
```

**Domain of Responsibilities**

[operator-framework/API][of-api]:

> - centralizing and providing all that is common for any internal or external validator

Author: ```suggestion
- providing a common framework for internal and external validators
```

> - centralizing and providing all that is common for any internal or external validator

Author: I like it but is not what I am trying to say.
I tied to improve let me know wdyt

> - centralizing and providing all that is common for any internal or external validator

Author: ```suggestion
- providing a common framework for internal and external validators
```

> - provider of any validator that is valid for any solution which will be distributed via OLM

Author: ```suggestion
- providing common validators (which are useful and required for any solution which will be distributed via OLM)
```

External Validators:

> - Validator projects with the purpose to centralize specific checks and criteria

Author: ```suggestion
- location for catalog or vendor specific validators
```

> - Implementing what is specific and without the need to re-implement common usage

Author: ```suggestion
- implementation of catalog or vendor specific validation logic
- extending the [operator-framework/API][of-api] and providing the results in the same format
```

> - Extending and implementing [operator-framework/API][of-api] interfaces to ensure a standard for its consumers

Author: ```suggestion
- Extending [operator-framework/API][of-api] and using it as a lib to ensure a standard for its consumers
```

> - Extending and implementing [operator-framework/API][of-api] interfaces to ensure a standard for its consumers

Author: I think I could address this one let me know if not.
